JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour":
President-elect Donald
Trump names his son-in-law a
senior White
House adviser, sparking concerns
of nepotism.
We talk with Trump senior
adviser Kellyanne
Conway about how this and why
some Cabinet
nominees have incomplete
background checks.
Also ahead, a look at President
Obama's health
care legacy, the biggest and
most controversial
pieces of his administration.
And the children of the camps --
what life
is like for the Iraqi kids who
are growing
up as collateral damage of war.
MAULID WARFA, UNICEF: What
worries me the
most is to have these children
roaming around
with no proper schooling, with
no proper protection,
losing their future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A crush of
confirmation hearings
begins tomorrow for team Trump,
but the focus
tonight is on someone who's not
subject to
Senate confirmation.
He's a close relative of the
president-elect,
and the transition announced
this evening
he's getting a top White House
slot.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: Throughout the
campaign, Jared
Kushner had Donald Trump's ear
and now the
president wants him to follow
him to the White
House as a top adviser.
Like the president-elect,
Kushner, who turns
36 tomorrow, is the son of a
real estate magnate.
He became CEO of Kushner
Companies, his father's
multibillion-dollar business, in
2008.
In 2009, he married Ivanka
Trump.
Trump insiders credit Kushner
with restructuring
and modernizing his
father-in-law's campaign.
During the transition, he's been
involved
in key personnel decisions.
Former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger
told "Forbes" magazine: "Every
president I
have ever known has one or two
people he intuitively
and structurally trusts.
I think Jared might be that
person."
Even with president-elect
Trump's confidence,
Kushner could face hurdles
before he can assume
a White House post.
They arise from both who he is
and what he
owns.
A 1967 federal law bars
officials from appointing
relatives to any agency they
control.
But it's not clear whether it
applies to White
House jobs.
Today, Kushner's lawyer argues
it doesn't
and said Kushner won't be taking
a salary.
As for Kushner's business
holdings, a senior
transition official said he will
resign as
CEO and divest from a
significant number of
assets, including foreign
investments.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will get the
Trump team's
perspective on this and other
issues right
after the news summary.
In the day's other news: Russia
pushed back
against a U.S. intelligence
report that it
meddled in the presidential
campaign.
The report last week said
President Vladimir
Putin personally ordered the
effort.
Today, a Kremlin spokesman said
the investigation
is "reminiscent of a
witch-hunt," echoing
language that president-elect
Trump used last
week.
MAN (through translator): We
still don't know
what data those who make such
unfounded accusations
have.
We still strongly reject any
involvement of
Moscow and accusations that
Russian officials
or institutions were involved in
any hacker
attacks.
We are observing a serious
fatigue with these
accusations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Trump today
deflected questions
today about the hacking.
He said -- quote -- "We will
talk to you about
that at another time."
He holds his news conference
since the election
on Wednesday.
China warned president-elect
Donald Trump
today that it will "take
revenge" if he reneges
on the so-called one China
policy.
That doctrine treats Taiwan as
part of China.
The threat from Chinese
state-run media came
after the Taiwanese president
made a weekend
stopover in Houston, Texas, and
met with Republican
lawmakers.
Mr. Trump has spoken with the
Taiwanese leader,
and at one point, appeared to
suggest that
the one-China policy might need
reconsidering.
The man accused of killing five
people at
the Fort Lauderdale, Florida,
airport had
his first appearance in federal
court today.
According to court documents,
Esteban Santiago
has admitted to the fatal
shooting last Friday.
At the hearing today, the Iraq
War veteran
said he understood the charges
against him,
which carry the death penalty.
Northern California and Nevada
are facing
what could be their worst flood
disaster in
the last decade.
A powerful storm system moved in
over the
weekend, unleashing heavy
downpours and strong
winds.
And it forced some 1,300
residents in Reno,
Nevada, to evacuate after the
Truckee River
overflowed.
The storm also blew down a giant
California
sequoia that is famed for a
tunnel carved
into its truck.
It had stood for centuries.
The musical "La La Land" swept
seven Golden
Globe film awards.
And the ceremony also touched
off a war of
words with president-elect
Trump.
It started with actress Meryl
Streep and her
speech accepting a lifetime
achievement award.
She deplored Mr. Trump's
imitating a disabled
reporter during the primaries.
MERYL STREEP, Actress: And this
instinct to
humiliate, when it's modeled by
someone in
the public platform, by someone
powerful,
it filters down into everybody's
life, because
it kind of gives permission for
other people
to do the same thing.
When the powerful use their
position to bully
others, we all lose.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
president-elect fired back
on Twitter today.
He called Streep -- quote --
"one of the most
overrated actresses in
Hollywood" and -- quote
-- "a Hillary flunky who lost
big."
Mr. Trump also tweeted praise
for Fiat Chrysler's
decision to build new jeeps and
a truck in
the Midwestern U.S., instead of
Mexico.
The company said it's creating
2,000 jobs.
On Wall Street, meanwhile,
stocks followed
oil prices lower.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 76 points
to close at 19887.
The Nasdaq rose 10 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I sit down
with senior Trump adviser
Kellyanne Conway;
our Politics Monday duo take on
a packed week
for the president-elect; a look
at the legacy
of President Obama's health care
overhaul;
and much more.
The last day has seen a rise in
both concern
over and defense of
president-elect Trump's
Cabinet nominees after news that
some of them
have not completed ethics
reviews.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
president-elect walked
out of Trump Tower with a
business leader,
Jack Ma of the Chinese
e-commerce giant Alibaba,
but his words were about
politics and his
Cabinet nominees.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I think
they will all pass.
LISA DESJARDINS: That after
Trump met with
a key ally, Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell,
who dismissed concerns about
vetting.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: Yes,
everybody will be properly
vetted, as they
have been in the past, and I'm
hopeful that
we will get up to six or seven
picks of the
national security team in place
on day one.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this ahead
of a packed
week, with two confirmation
hearings set for
tomorrow, five more set for
Wednesday, and
at least three slated for
Thursday.
But "NewsHour" learned that
education secretary-designate
Betsy DeVos and three other
Trump nominees
have not yet cleared an ethics
review.
Democrats with their Senate
leader, Chuck
Schumer, called it a rush job.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: Jamming
all these hearings into one or
two days, making
members run from committee to
committee makes
no sense.
Even if it takes a few weeks to
get through
them all in order to carefully
consider their
nominations, that is well worth
it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Schumer has
threatened to
slow down the Senate
confirmation process
if senators don't have all the
nominees' information.
Meanwhile, Republicans point to
2009, when
the hearing schedule was nearly
as packed,
and 14 Obama nominees, like
Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton and Attorney
General Eric
Holder, were confirmed in the
first nine days
after inauguration.
Now that is being called the
Obama treatment,
relatively fast confirmation.
But Democrats say the difference
is that President
Obama's nominees all cleared
their ethics
review process before their
hearings, even
before they were announced.
The Office of Government Ethics
says some
Trump nominees have not even
filed their paperwork
yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, thank
you for that
report, but take us through this
process.
What exactly is required of
these nominees?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, it
depends on what
committee you're going in front
of.
Take you through what everyone
is required
of, first of all, three things.
Every one of these nominees has
to have an
FBI background check, they have
to have given
financial disclosures to their
committee of
choice -- or the committee that
oversees their
nomination, and they have to
fill out a committee
questionnaire.
But, Judy, what depends on each
committee
is the following, whether or not
an ethics
review must be filed before a
hearing or simply
before a vote.
It must be filed at some time.
But that's why we see these
hearings this
week before the ethics reviews
are all in.
Also, only three committees
require tax forms
from the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tell us a little
more about
what is missing for some of
these nominees.
LISA DESJARDINS: These ethics
forms that we're
talking about are significant.
There are two pieces to them.
One is the financial disclosure,
and the second
is a letter in which each
nominee has to state
any potential conflict of
interest with their
future job and more importantly
what they're
going to do to make sure the
conflict of interest
doesn't matter.
For instance, Rex Tillerson
filed in his letter,
which we now have, that he will
go ahead and
not just not get a salary from
ExxonMobil,
but any future bonuses which
were significant,
he's going to now sever ties
with altogether
from ExxonMobil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as we have
been saying,
some of these nominees have
these very complicated
financial backgrounds.
I want to ask you about what the
director
of the Office of Government
Ethics wrote in
a letter this weekend.
He said, to his knowledge, never
in the 40
years has a nominee gone before
a hearing
without having their ethics
review completed.
Is that your understanding?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's
extraordinary coming
from an ethics office, words
like that.
Almost.
The Republicans say there is one
example where
a hearing has been held of a
nominee who did
not file their ethics paperwork.
That is Rod Paige.
He was George W. Bush's
education nominee
way back in 2001.
His ethics paperwork came eight
days after
his hearing, but, again,
importantly, Judy,
before the vote.
But all of this, I think, Judy,
the bottom
line is senators are questioning
nominees
now before they have some of
their paperwork.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And again only
one in 40 years?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And this Office of Government
Ethics reviews
thousands of government
appointees, every
Cabinet nominee in the last 40
years.
And there is only one exception
that we know
of to this rule until now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I guess one
bottom line, Lisa,
is, could these nominees go
ahead and be subject
to a Senate vote if that
approval material,
or that ethics approval is not
done?
LISA DESJARDINS: The answer is
no.
And the reason is both Mitch
McConnell, the
Republican leader, and the
Democratic leader,
Chuck Schumer, have said that
they want all
of this paperwork in before the
full Senate
vote.
But, again, this is the review
time.
This is the chance when senators
can actually
scrutinize these nominees.
And they're doing it in some
cases without
the full set of information to
ask questions
from.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, a
question you and
I were discussing, we know
Donald Trump talked
in his campaign about changing
the way Washington
works.
Is that what's happening here,
or are we seeing
a tinkering with tradition?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think that's
absolutely
what's happening here, because
the way the
Senate works is by tradition.
And they are changing that
tradition to some
degree for Donald Trump.
The Office of Government Ethics
says the big
problem here is that these are
nominees who
just didn't get their paperwork
as early as
in the past.
They're complicated forms that
they have to
fill out, but the Trump
transition team was
aware of that.
Now we have on the Senate all
these hearings
this week.
By tradition, senators usually
have this information
in hand.
This time, they don't.
That is changing the way
Washington works
and scrutinizes our future
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Lisa
Desjardins, thank
you.
We are going to be occupied with
this all
this week, into next week.
We have got, what, five separate
confirmation
hearings on Wednesday, several
every day this
week.
LISA DESJARDINS: Nine all week,
yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trying to follow
it all and
do the best job we can covering
it.
Lisa, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A short time ago,
before the
Jared Kushner announcement, I
spoke with senior
Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway
about the concerns
surrounding some of these
Cabinet picks going
before the Senate this week.
I started by asking why the
confirmation hearings
should go forward before the
Office of Government
Ethics has fully vetted the
nominees.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior
Adviser: Judy,
as I understand it, some of the
materials
just aren't -- have not been
complete in the
process.
And so there is no reason to
delay hearings
that we expect will cover the
substance of
the duties that each of those
men and women
would have in those respective
departments
and agencies.
In addition, it's my
understanding that some
of the designees have been
requested to turn
over tax information that has
not been part
of the regular course of action
in the past.
So I'm not sure where that
stands, but we
really need a fully functioning
government
next week as we have the
transition of power
from President Obama to
President Trump.
And that necessitates having, if
we can, secretary
of treasury and state and
defense and commerce
and other agencies and
departments in place.
I'm sure that the senators can
ask these appointees
and designees under oath for
information about
the materials that haven't yet
been completed.
But I assure you all of our
appointees and
designees have been complying
with all of
the requests and the ethical
obligations that
have been requested of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you
mentioned tax returns.
Not all of them are required to
do that, but
by practice they are expected
to.
Does the president-elect think
they should
comply with these rules, when he
himself has
not provided his own tax
returns?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, the
president-elect
and his senior team believes
that anything
that is required by law should
be handed over.
And he knows that these men and
women who,
in some cases, are making
enormous sacrifices
to move to Washington, D.C.,
divest themselves
out of their significant
holdings and successful
companies to do so, are now
complying with
the ethics rules.
And, again, anybody can ask a
question they
want to ask, Judy.
I just hope that the questions
in the Senate
confirmation hearings are not
this big game
of gotcha and hide the ball that
we sometimes
see, and this level of
obstructionism that
has been promised by some of the
Democrats
in the Senate.
That would be unfortunate
because we need
the government to continue to
function effectively.
I'm sure that your viewers know
President
Obama had seven Cabinet
appointees confirmed
on Inauguration Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: We would like
the same courtesy
and the same practice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I just would
interrupt
to say that a number of the
individuals that
the president-elect has
nominated have very
complicated business, financial
backgrounds.
It's taking time.
Doesn't the public expect there
to be a full
vetting before they take office?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Yes, the
public probably
does expect that.
And, of course, the process
necessitates information
and disclosure, and under oath,
these men
and women will be asking
questions from these
Senate committees who are
overseeing the hearings.
I think that's incredibly
important also,
because people should realize
that, in past
confirmation hearings,
sometimes, people are
just asked to talk about how
they will deploy
different functions, what
decisions they made
in the past in hiring and
firing, and certainly
in their business practices.
And sometimes they're asked
about personal
financial information.
But let's just hope that it
advances the ball
forward for America in these
questions that
they're asking and have
something to do with
the proper functioning of the
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about several
other things.
You mentioned -- we were talking
about the
tax returns.
Are Mr. Trump's tax returns
still being audited
by the IRS?
Will that continue once he takes
office as
president?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: This was
discussed last
week actually in my presence.
And the fact is, the audit is
ongoing.
And so the answers are the same,
that as long
as there is an active audit, he
will not be
turning over his tax returns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will he turn them
over once
that audit is complete?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, he said
that he would.
I just don't know about the
specifics of the
audit.
And, again, respectfully, this
was vetted
very often and talked about in
the media constantly
on a daily basis, and the
American electorate
decided they wanted Donald Trump
to be their
president notwithstanding.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about the news
today, several news
organizations reporting
that the president-elect's
son-in-law, Jared
Kushner, will come into the
White House as
a senior adviser.
What exactly will his role be,
and why is
there not a concern about
nepotism?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, a few
things.
Jared will make that
announcement formally
when he and the president-elect
are ready
to do.
I sure hope the news reports are
true, Judy,
because it's an absolute
privilege and pleasure
to work with Jared Kushner on
the senior team,
and has been all along in the
transition and
the campaign.
Jared Kushner offers a
tremendous business
acumen and experience as a very
successful
real estate developer and
businessman himself.
He has holdings in many of the
companies that
he has now promised to divest.
He will sell his share at fair
market value,
and significant holdings like
666 Fifth Avenue,
Thrive Capital, and other
companies in which
he has a stake.
The nepotism law doesn't -- the
anti-nepotism
law doesn't apply to White House
appointments.
The president can appoint the
staff he wishes
to.
And he has had -- Jared has had
many lawyers
look at this, and they have
concluded, in
concert with the Office of
Government Ethics,
the OGE, that Jared is able to
have the special
adviser appointment by the
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two quick
questions.
Given, though, that he's the
president's son-in-law,
will he be first among equals
among the advisers
in the White House?
And, second of all, is Ivanka
Trump, his daughter,
coming into the administration
in any...
(CROSSTALK)
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Excuse me,
Judy.
Jared Kushner has the trust and
the ear of
his father-in-law, and that's
most important
in working in the West Wing in
that capacity.
And he has this combination of
political instincts
and business acumen that's truly
exceptional.
He's involved in many of the
decision-making
processes.
That will continue in the White
House.
And Jared's always been a
fabulous team player
on our senior team.
He really respects the advice
and counsel
of all of us.
And we're also all very candid
with each other.
And we really try to play to
everybody's best
and highest use.
Ivanka Trump will make that
decision and that
announcement, I'm sure, in the
coming days
or coming weeks.
And she, too, has significant
success in the
private sector, certainly as an
executive
in the Trump Corporation, but
also with her
own brand, which is quite
successful.
She tells me hundreds of
millions of dollars
in sales this year, the Ivanka
Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
It sounds like you're saying she
is coming
in to the administration?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, that
would be the
intent.
That certainly would be
wonderful news to
me.
And I believe that that is the
intention and
the goal.
But Ivanka Trump also will make
that decision
and that announcement on her own
terms.
She, too, is working with ethics
and compliance
experts and lawyers to make sure
everything
is as it should be before those
announcements
are made and those jobs are
taken.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kellyanne Conway,
thank you
very much for talking with us.
For more on the upcoming Cabinet
confirmation
hearings, the latest on the
president-elect's
transition to the White House,
and more, it's
time for Politics Monday with
Tamara Keith
of NPR and Susan Page,
Washington bureau chief
for USA Today.
All right, welcome to both of
you.
So, Tam, we just heard from
Kellyanne Conway.
What do you expect from these
confirmation
hearings?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: They
certainly will be interesting,
but they will
all be happening at the same
time, so we will
have to have split-screens to
pay attention
to everything.
And add on that screen Donald
Trump having
a press conference on Wednesday
on the same
day that there are five
confirmation hearings.
It's going to be information
overload.
Democrats will try to put up a
fight, to draw
out contrasts with Donald Trump
potentially
between his Cabinet picks and
the president-elect.
And they will try to make it as
painful as
possible, but there isn't much
the Democrats
can actually do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, do you
expect this ethic
-- the lack of ethics review to
be done for
some of these nominees to
continue to be an
issue?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, I think the Democrats will
try to make
it an issue, but it's not
stopping the hearings.
Now, Mitch McConnell on Sunday
on "Face the
Nation" did say that they
wouldn't hold votes
on the floor until the ethics
paperwork was
done.
So there is at least that.
There is not a law that says
they have to
wait, but it's certainly been
the practice
in the past not to confirm
somebody.
But the fact that the review
won't have been
done before the hearings for
some of these
candidates is a serious one for
Democrats,
because there are questions they
won't be
able to ask.
There are things they don't know
that they
may find out through these
ethics reviews.
So, that's one reason Democrats
are concerned
about this issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tam, are
Democrats targeting
in particular some of the
nominees over others
or how are they looking at this?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, that's the
challenge that
they're facing is that they have
targeted
eight nominees.
Well, eight is a very big
number, and so they
aren't -- it's sort of a
scattershot approach.
There isn't like one nominee
that they are
just going to take down, in part
because they
don't have the votes to truly
block anyone
unless they get Republican help.
And at the moment, it doesn't
look like they
have it.
Now, something could change.
A hearing could go poorly.
But at the moment, by the
numbers, Democrats
aren't in a strong position.
They don't have much leverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, what is
your reporting
telling you about who is going
to get the
most attention from Democrats,
or are they
just spreading it out equally
among all of
them?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, I think there
are some cases
where there will be proxy
fights.
And I think Rex Tillerson is a
good example
of that.
Senate Democrats and even some
Republicans
don't have a chance to quiz
Donald Trump about
his policy toward Russia, but
they can ask
Rex Tillerson about it.
And Rex Tillerson himself, as
head of ExxonMobil,
had a lot of dealings with
Russia in general,
with Vladimir Putin in
particular.
So, I think that will be a big
source of debate
there.
In some cases, I think they are
going to target
the person.
I think that may be the case
with Jeff Sessions,
who has the first hearing
tomorrow.
Now, you would think they would
go easy on
a senator, because it's an old
boys club.
But in this case, I think some
of the Democratic
senators have real concerns
about things he
has said in the past, especially
dealing with
race relations, with voting
rights and on
immigration.
So in that case, it may be
taking a little
more personal turn.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tam, Susan just
mentioned what
Mitch McConnell, the Senate
majority leader,
said over the weekend.
I'm trying to understand.
Is this really different from
what happened
eight years ago, when President
Obama's nominees
were coming through, because he
made it sound
as if, oh, this is just the same
thing we
-- same way we have always done
it here.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, they have
typically tried
to defer to presidents, and they
have typically
tried to have a big group ready
to go when
the president takes the oath of
office.
However, Donald Trump's
nominees, some of
them, at least four of them,
have not finished
-- who have hearings scheduled
the ethics process, and that is
out of the
ordinary, as we heard in an
earlier segment.
The only precedent that
Republicans are pointing
to goes back to when George W.
Bush was first
coming into office.
And they have one example.
So it is the best practice to
have the ethics
review done, and it is also a
practice that
has largely happened in the
past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, I want to
turn to something
that happened last night, the
Golden Globes
Awards.
We reported it earlier.
Meryl Streep, getting an award,
uses her time
to take on Donald Trump, and she
pinned it
on what she described as his
mocking a reporter,
news reporter, with
disabilities, and we saw
Mr. Trump come back and tweet
about her today,
calling her overrated and saying
he didn't
mock him.
Is this something that it's
smart for him
to engage in?
How do you see this?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, it's
untraditional for a
president to take on Meryl
Streep when she
criticizes him at the Golden
Globes, or Arnold
Schwarzenegger when he doesn't
get ratings
as big as he did for that
reality show that
he took over.
And I think, you know, most
political pundits
would say, but this is a big
mistake, it's
not presidential.
On the other hand, it's pretty
authentic.
It's what got -- it's the kind
of attitude
and the kind of swagger that got
Donald Trump
where he is today.
So I guess we will have to see
if voters are
comfortable with this approach,
because, believe
me, I think we're going to be
seeing tweets
like this for the next four
years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we shall
see.
Finally, I want to ask both of
you, we know,
tomorrow night, President Obama,
Tam, gives
his farewell address.
We're going to be covering it
live here 9:00
Eastern.
You have given some thought to
the farewell
of this president.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
Well, and I have given some
thought to the
farewells of lots of presidents.
This is a long tradition going
back to George
Washington, who delivered the
first farewell
address.
And there tends to be a mix of
looking backward
and looking forward.
George Washington offered
warnings for people
to come.
So did Dwight Eisenhower.
President Obama, I imagine, and
based on what
his administration has said, is
likely to
fall into the category of people
who -- presidents
who talk about American values
and America's
role in the world.
And so I think that we can --
you know, as
he did on the campaign trail,
talked about
-- on the campaign trail for
Hillary Clinton,
talked about what he sees as
American values,
that might be the message that
he tries to
send with his farewell.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, what are
you looking
for tomorrow night?
SUSAN PAGE: You know, the stakes
got much
higher when Hillary Clinton lost
the election,
because we now have President
Obama trying
to make his case that he's done
a lot, and
it's good, the country's in
better shape than
when he took over, and that is a
legacy worth
preserving, because Donald Trump
is going
to come in and try to dismantle
big parts
of that legacy.
So I think the stakes get higher
for him.
And also his party is a little
bit in the
wilderness, trying to figure out
where they
go.
And what will the role of Barack
Obama be
for the Democratic Party going
forward?
That might be one thing to
listen for tomorrow
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I know a lot
of people
are asking that question,
especially since
he's going to continue to live
in Washington,
D.C.
He is not going to be able to
hide.
Or I guess he will try to hide,
but we will
see.
Susan Page, Tamara Keith, thank
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
upended lives
of Iraqi children fleeing the
war in Mosul.
But, first, we continue our
series on President
Obama's legacy.
The president has been making
the case during
the final days of his term to
preserve his
signature domestic achievement.
It comes as congressional
Republicans have
already begun the process of
dismantling the
Affordable Care Act.
More than 20 million Americans
gained coverage
through the law.
But as special correspondent
Sarah Varney
reports, the nation remains
deeply divided
over whether it is the
president's greatest
success or a massive failure.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
This is going to take a little
while.
SARAH VARNEY: When President
Obama signed
his landmark health care bill in
March 2010,
he achieved what presidents and
members of
Congress had long tried and
failed to do.
BARACK OBAMA: We are done.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SARAH VARNEY: Provide
near-universal health
insurance to Americans.
Democrats were jubilant.
Those in Obama's inner circle,
like Bob Kocher,
one of the law's primary
architects, celebrated
their victory at the White
House.
BOB KOCHER, Key Affordable Care
Act Architect:
It was a moment of total joy.
We felt like we'd accomplished
something hard
and amazing and important that
would go down
in history as being an important
step forward
in American health care.
And the president felt that way,
and I think
we all celebrated and felt like
the hardest
part was perhaps behind us.
SARAH VARNEY: Since Harry
Truman, every Democratic
president has dreamed about
universal coverage.
Jonathan Oberlander, a health
policy historian
at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel
Hill, says Obama succeeded in
winning over
health care interest groups that
had fought
previous reform attempts.
But the bill became a flash
point for bigger
ideological battles.
JONATHAN OBERLANDER, Professor
of Social Medicine,
Health Policy and Management,
University of
North Carolina: In key respects,
it was a
policy success, but it was also
always a political
failure since 2010.
And that political failure
reflects that partisan
polarization, which Democrats
and the Obama
administration never figured out
a way to
overcome.
SARAH VARNEY: The bill passed
without a single
Republican vote and would face
unflagging
opposition, explosive town hall
meetings
WOMAN: If you let the free
market system work,
everybody could have insurance.
SARAH VARNEY: Angry Tea Party
protests.
PROTESTERS: Obamacare has got to
go!
PROTESTERS: What do we want?
PROTESTERS: Health care!
SARAH VARNEY: And a Supreme
Court decision
in 2012 that, despite upholding
most of the
law, weakened one of its central
provisions
by making the Medicaid expansion
optional
for states.
Senator Charles Grassley, a
Republican from
Iowa who was involved in the
initial bipartisan
discussions, said his side
turned away after
Democrats, who themselves were
frustrated
by the prolonged negotiations
and felt they
had a mandate, decided to move
forward alone.
SEN.
CHARLES GRASSLEY (R), Iowa: It
was a take
it or leave it, and so,
basically, we were
pushed out of the negotiations.
And, quite frankly, there was a
lot of institutional
knowledge among Republicans that
would've
probably prevented a lot of bad
things that
happened going wrong.
I think it's a perfect example
of trying to
do something in a partisan way.
SARAH VARNEY: The Obama
administration believed
the law would eventually become
popular as
more Americans felt its
benefits.
But public opinion remained
divided.
Republicans voted to repeal or
delay part
or all of it more than 60 times,
always facing
the prospect of a certain veto
from President
Obama.
Now president-elect Donald Trump
has vowed
to kill the law for good.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: Repealing
Obamacare is one of the single
most important
reasons we must win on November
8.
SARAH VARNEY: A promise that
appealed to many
voters around the country.
Here in Mansfield, Ohio, once a
booming manufacturing
town, the Affordable Care Act
has brought
insurance coverage, new health
care jobs and
an influx of federal money.
All told, nearly one million
Ohioans are covered
under Obamacare.
But economic angst in Rust Belt
states like
this one handed the presidential
election
to Donald Trump, giving him the
power to repeal
President Obama's signature
domestic policy.
KARI WESTFIELD, Third Street
Family Health
Services: This area was, the
kids would get
older, graduate, and then leave
and not come
back.
SARAH VARNEY: What happens next
is up for
grabs.
Kari Westfield helps sign
patients up for
Medicaid in this Ohio county
where Mr. Trump
won nearly 70 percent of the
vote.
KARI WESTFIELD: The most recent
was the GM
closing, and that was a huge,
huge hit to
the economy.
SARAH VARNEY: As manufacturing
plants here
have closed, nearly 30 percent
of residents
have had to enroll in Medicaid,
which was
expanded in Ohio to include most
low-income
adults under the Affordable Care
Act.
Since the health law took
effect, the share
of uninsured patients at Third
Street Family
Health Services, where Westfield
works, fell
from 30 percent to 10 percent.
That includes Larry Avery, a
31-year-old basketball
coach who has been rushing to
get medical
and dental care before Mr. Trump
takes the
law away.
LARRY AVERY, Patient: I just
thought it was
just a move that he was doing
just to make
it harder than what it already
is, because,
I mean, if it's working, if it
helps, why
would you want to take that
away?
I don't think it benefits the
country at all.
SARAH VARNEY: Among those trying
to enroll
in Obamacare's expanded Medicaid
are Trump
supporters Mary and Jim Heenan.
A nurse trying to recover from
an opioid addiction,
Mary Heenan says she and her
husband need
help.
And though she says it can be
difficult to
reconcile, Heenan still despises
the health
law.
She says it forced the surgeons
she once worked
with to provide shoddy medical
care.
MARY HEENAN, Patient: I know I'm
in this spot
where I need help right now from
the government,
but the Affordable Care Act is
the worst thing
that's ever happened to this
country.
And that's exactly why I voted
for Trump,
because I knew Hillary was going
to follow
in Obama's footsteps.
SARAH VARNEY: But John Corlett,
at the Center
for Community Solutions, an Ohio
think tank,
says other voters didn't take
Mr. Trump's
promise to repeal the law
seriously.
JOHN CORLETT, Center for
Community Solutions:
I think people have a natural
inclination
to think that, once something
starts, that
it's hard to stop,that it's hard
to take down.
And I think a lot of people sort
of approached
it that way, said, well, no,
they wouldn't
do that.
SARAH VARNEY: Across Ohio, the
health law
has dramatically reduced the
number of people
without health insurance.
At MetroHealth in Cleveland as
elsewhere in
the country, the influx of
insured patients
has allowed the health system to
provide more
preventive care and cut costs by
nearly 30
percent.
Despite strong opinions about
what's become
known as Obamacare, elements of
the law remain
widely popular.
Health plans can't refuse to
insure based
on preexisting conditions, and
young adults
can stay on their parents' plans
until age
26.
PROTESTERS: No repeal without
replace.
SARAH VARNEY: Mindy Hedges
showed up at a
rally outside Senator Rob
Portman's office
in Columbus to show how vital
the law has
been for those with medical
problems.
MINDY HEDGES, Ohio: I'm scared
for our country.
I'm scared for a lot of reasons.
SARAH VARNEY: Before the health
law, she couldn't
get insurance.
MINDY HEDGES: I was so grateful
to President
Obama.
I owe President Obama my life.
As a type 1 diabetic, I'm
uninsurable as far
as the insurance companies are
concerned.
And now they couldn't take that
into any consideration.
And my age, they couldn't take
into consideration.
SARAH VARNEY: Hedges has been
calling her
congressman and senators every
day to make
sure they hear her story.
MINDY HEDGES: Will he be
supporting keeping
it at least until we have
something better
or at least something to
substitute for it?
SARAH VARNEY: But there are
others, especially
small business owners and the
self-employed,
who are frustrated by what's
been happening
in the insurance marketplaces.
ANIETRA HAMPER, Ohio: There do
not seem to
be a lot of options this year.
SARAH VARNEY: Anietra Hamper is
a travel writer
who started her own business a
few years ago,
and says the law made a mess of
her coverage.
ANIETRA HAMPER: Every year,
there have been
fewer providers.
There's fewer plans by the
providers that
are left, higher monthly
premiums, deductibles
have skyrocketed, and the
benefits have dwindled.
SARAH VARNEY: Those frustrations
drove Hamper
to vote for Mr. Trump, who says
he wants to
keep the law's more popular
provisions and
scrap the rest in favor of a
less regulated
insurance market.
But health care experts say it
will be impossible
to pay for those benefits
without a mandate
that all Americans have
coverage.
Repealing it with no plan in
place, they say,
will create chaos in the
insurance market
and catastrophe at hospitals and
clinics.
But Hamper says the law has
already done enough
damage.
ANIETRA HAMPER: This isn't
working.
So, if Donald Trump says he
wants to reinstate
a free marketplace, where we
have more choices,
more competition, better care,
more affordability,
OK.
And like every other American,
you know, we
have to hope that that's what we
get.
SARAH VARNEY: Senator Grassley
says it's too
soon to lay out what comes next.
SEN.
CHARLES GRASSLEY: Obviously,
repeal is very
much what's going to happen.
Whether it's a transition period
that it takes
a period of time to get total
replacement,
or whether it's done
incrementally, those
decisions have not been made at
this point.
SARAH VARNEY: Whatever the
outcome, many observers
say President Obama's legacy
will forever
include his ambitious attempt to
solve one
of the nation's most intractable
problems.
BOB KOCHER: I think, forever, we
have changed
the conversation that we need to
have an approach
to cover all Americans.
And, if nothing else, this law
now leads Republicans
to agree that we need to have an
approach
to cover all Americans with
high-quality insurance.
So I think that's a real
accomplishment, and
that wouldn't have happened
without this law.
JONATHAN OBERLANDER: Some of the
most gifted
presidents in the 20th century
tried comprehensive
health care reform, and they
failed.
President Obama succeeded.
This is not a footnote in
history.
It will go down as a landmark.
SARAH VARNEY: And one of the
most important
legacies of the Obama years.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Kaiser Health News,
I'm Sarah Varney.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, we
continue our series
on the Obama years with a look
at the president's
efforts to reform the nation's
criminal justice
system.
Iraqi government forces are
today engaged
in heavy fighting against ISIS
militants in
the city of Mosul, battling
neighborhood by
neighborhood.
Since the operation began last
October, almost
130,000 of the city's
million-plus residents
have fled.
Many are living in nearby camps
for internally
displaced people in Iraqi
Kurdistan.
Half of them are children.
For two-and-a-half years, all
they have known
is ISIS.
Now they and their families are
stranded,
waiting out a long, cold winter.
From Northern Iraq, special
correspondent
Marcia Biggs and videographer
Eric O'Connor
report.
MARCIA BIGGS: It's a scene of
utter chaos.
News of food arriving sends
these civilians
displaced by the battle for
Mosul into a frenzy,
charging this truck, as
desperate hands reach
out to catch bread and water,
talk to a mob
of hungry people.
The camps were supposed to be
temporary solution,
yet families here are facing
what now promises
to be a very long winter.
It's painfully cold, down to
freezing temperatures
at night.
Toxic fumes from the gas stoves
and heaters
permeate the tents.
Yet, in this corner of the camp,
we found
a reason to smile.
These are sounds most of these
children have
not made in almost
two-and-a-half years.
Every day, the children clamor
at the gates
of this child-friendly space.
They get a precious six hours a
week here
to play, sing and learn, a far
cry from the
horrors of ISIS.
We sat down with a few students
in the drawing
tent.
Like most children, 13-year-old
Zuha stopped
going to school when ISIS came
to Mosul and
missed out on things like
drawing.
Now she draws her memories of
home.
ZUHA, Student (through
translator): We had
a garden, so I draw flowers.
MARCIA BIGGS: Twelve-year-old
Bishara did
stay in school under ISIS, which
used militarization
and indoctrination as part of
its lesson plan.
In these pages of a math book,
children are
asked to solve problems about
setting land
mines and killing nonbelievers.
BISHARA, Student (through
translator): After
ISIS came, I stayed in school
one-and-a-half
years.
Everything changed.
In math, the curriculum changed.
Thy used bullets.
Like, one bullet plus two
bullets equals three
bullets.
MARCIA BIGGS: Was that scary?
BISHARA (through translator):
Yes, it was
so scary.
MARCIA BIGGS: She finally asked
her parents
to remove her from school, but
she still has
big dreams.
I asked her what she wants to be
when she
grows up.
You want to be a doctor?
Like many of the children, she's
drawing an
Iraqi flag.
It says, "I love Iraq," words
forbidden under
the Islamic State, where the
Iraqi flag was
banned and members of the Iraqi
army executed.
Twelve-year-old Mohamed wants to
be an artist
someday and is proud of his
flag.
He had two uncles in the Iraqi
police force.
MOHAMED, Student (through
translator): They
killed two of my uncles they
worked for the
police.
ISIS killed anyone from the
MARCIA BIGGS: Did you spend a
lot of time
with your uncles?
Were you really close with them?
MOHAMED (through translator):
Yes.
They loved me.
They used to bring me toys.
My father and I used to play
hide and seek
with them.
MARCIA BIGGS: Were you get
scared that maybe
your father might be hurt too?
MOHAMED (through translator):
Yes.
I am worried about my father and
brothers.
Almost all of my uncles were
police, so my
father was afraid.
MARCIA BIGGS: It's a familiar
fear.
As we spoke, 12-year-old Mahmoud
was clearly
distressed, but wanted very much
to talk.
MAHMOUD, Student (through
translator): ISIS
was in Mosul for about
two-and-a-half years.
When they came to the city, we
thought they
were good and they wouldn't hurt
us.
But they began to kill and
torture people.
That's why we hated them.
MARCIA BIGGS: Anyone you know
was hurt?
MAHMOUD (through translator): I
didn't see,
and I don't want to see.
It was horrible and scary.
MARCIA BIGGS: He says he loved
math and reading
before ISIS came, and still
wants to be an
engineer.
MAHMOUD (through translator):
I'm comfortable
now that I am back to learning
and studying.
I can study now, which is good.
I'm relieved.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you feel safe
here?
MAHMOUD (through translator):
Yes.
Here, I feel safe.
There are people protecting us,
guarding us.
But we still live in a tent, and
it rains
a lot.
It's really affecting us.
MARCIA BIGGS: He echoes a fear
we heard again
and again from the mothers in
the camp, the
terror of ISIS replaced by an
unknown future
in a tent at the beginning of a
cold, wet
winter.
Twenty-old-year-old Hijran
Tantafati (ph)
was an officer in the Iraqi
police.
When ISIS took Mosul, seven men
came to their
door for him.
HIJRAN, Iraq (through
translator): They executed
my husband because he was a
policeman working
for the Iraqi government.
And he wouldn't give up his
weapons and surrender.
They killed all the policemen
because they
said they were nonbelievers.
They finally gave us the body a
month after
he died, but they wouldn't allow
us to have
a proper funeral.
MARCIA BIGGS: Suddenly, a widow
with two children,
no money, and no job, she was
devastated,
but too afraid to speak out.
If she ventured outside the
house without
strict Islamic clothing, ISIS
would torture
her male relatives.
Hijran and her children are here
with her
older sister, Hiba, and her
family.
They fled Mosul after Iraqi
forces backed
by coalition airstrikes pushed
ISIS from their
neighborhood.
They still have two sisters and
three brothers
in Mosul, so they have covered
their faces
to protect them from retribution
-- public
torture and execution made
routine under ISIS.
How did you explain this to your
children?
How did you try to protect them
from this?
HIBA, Iraq (through translator):
I didn't
let them do anything.
I even banned them from going to
school.
I didn't let them go outside.
I would see torturing in the
market, cutting
off hands, cutting off a head.
They used a lot of torture.
But, thank God, I didn't let the
children
see any of it.
MARCIA BIGGS: Hiba became
pregnant last year
and entered a deep depression.
She gave birth to baby Karam at
home just
over a month before we met, with
her husband
and sister by her side, as
coalition airstrikes
thundered down.
HIBA (through translator): It
was the hardest
day in my life.
I was so scared and confused.
But God made it easy for me, and
I gave birth.
The houses were being bombed,
and I was so
scared.
MARCIA BIGGS: Are you afraid of
the life that
he's been brought into?
HIBA (through translator): I'm
worried about
the weather and the cold
temperatures here.
Of course I'm afraid for him,
for so many
reasons.
MARCIA BIGGS: Aid organizations
expected more
people at camps like these, but
for a much
shorter time.
As the battle for Mosul
continues to grind
on with no end in sight, those
fleeing the
battle continue to arrive in
droves, and it
doesn't look like they are going
anywhere
anytime soon.
Maulid Warfa heads operations at
UNICEF in
Irbil, which runs the
child-friendly space.
He says his main concern is the
duration of
the battle and the fact that the
camps were
set up as emergency measures,
without proper
schools in the plans.
MAULID WARFA, UNICEF: What
worries me the
most is to have these children
roaming around
with no proper schooling, with
no proper protection,
losing their future.
Imagine if these were your
children.
What do you want your children
to be?
You want them to be going to
school, you want
them to be children again, you
want them to
be protected, you want them to
be loved, you
want them to be growing up as
very peaceful
human beings.
MARCIA BIGGS: The longer the war
grinds on,
the longer these families remain
trapped in
what human rights organizations
are calling
de facto detention centers.
As we drove up to the camps, we
noticed parking
lots filled with the cars of
those who drove
there when fighting again, but
are now forbidden
to leave.
Brigadier General Halkwat Rafaat
says they
could be a security threat.
BRIG.
GEN.
HALKWAT RAFAAT, Iraq (through
translator):
Leaving the camp is forbidden.
They can't leave the camp until
Mosul is liberated.
We keep their I.D.s with us.
They will get their I.D.s when
they go back
to their homes.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, there's
nowhere to go?
They can't go home until they're
told that
they can go home?
BRIG.
GEN.
HALKWAT RAFAAT (through
translator): No, they
can't leave.
MARCIA BIGGS: I asked the
sisters, which was
worse, life here or under ISIS?
HIJRAN (through translator): Of
course life
here is better than ISIS.
ISIS terrified people.
They made us afraid of
everything.
But we are trapped here, and
it's like we
traded one jail for another one.
We simply want to leave and live
our lives.
We know nothing about our
families in Mosul.
We don't know what is happening
there.
MARCIA BIGGS: And still they
come, despite
the harsh conditions.
We were there when 6-year-old
Dema arrived
from Mosul with her family off,
not even yet
off the bus.
"I want to say hi to my
grandparents in Kirkuk
and my grandparents in Irbil,"
she told me,
and then was overcome with
emotions.
They may be less than 100 miles
away, but
little does she know she likely
has no chance
of seeing them or of leaving
this camp anytime
soon.
Like most of the resilient
children we met,
she was all smiles when we saw
her again.
Are you happy here?
DEMA, 6 Years Old (through
translator): Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: Why?
DEMA (through translator): There
is no bombing
here.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, what do you
want to do now?
DEMA (through translator): I
want to play.
MARCIA BIGGS: It was a universal
desire.
As we left, in their tattered
clothes, most
without proper shoes, the
children wanted
nothing more than to go with us.
And it was everything we could
do to drive
away.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs in
Hassan Sham camp east of Mosul,
Northern Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
to our "NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
might be of interest to you,
too.
The organization Back on My Feet
uses running
as a catalyst to combat
homelessness.
The group operates in 12 cities
across the
nation, including Boston, where
Cristina Quinn
from PBS station WGBH paid them
a visit.
CRISTINA QUINN: It's 5:30 a.m.
It's dark and it's cold.
But none of that has discouraged
this group
from meeting up for their
morning run.
This is Team Hope.
They meet up every three times a
week outside
of the Hope House Rehab Center
in Roxbury.
The group is made up of guys
from various
homeless shelters and recovery
programs around
Boston.
The whole idea is that these
morning runs
will change their lives.
That's the core mission of the
organization
Back on My Feet, using running
as a catalyst
to move people out of
homelessness and into
jobs.
And, as executive director,
Theresa Lynn,
puts it, showing up for these
runs is just
the beginning of charting a new
course.
THERESA LYNN, Executive
Director, Back on
My Feet: The first step
obviously is running
or walking with a team three
days a week.
You do that for a month, then
you're eligible
for what we call the next steps,
which is
really where the program gets
started.
It's employment training, access
to job resources,
access to housing resources,
more gear, more
running clothes.
We co-create a plan with you.
CRISTINA QUINN: That includes
counseling,
updating skills, paying for exam
books and
certifications or finding an
apartment.
It worked for Curt Ronan, a
recovering addict
who still runs with Hope House
three days
a week.
He says the program has been
transformative.
CURT RONAN, Team Leader, Back on
My Feet:
Running is part of my recovery,
and I want
to show that it does work.
CRISTINA QUINN: He's been clean
for three
years, and, in that time, has
run both the
Boston Marathon and the New York
City Marathon.
The stakes are even higher now
that he has
a baby on the way.
Victor Rivera, just out of
prison, is hoping
the program can work the same
magic for him.
His teammates also say he's the
fastest runner.
VICTOR RIVERA, Back on My Feet:
I look forward
to it every day we run, because
it's like
we have stories that we that are
either similar
or things that we can actually
relate to,
and that actually helps me stay
with the group.
CRISTINA QUINN: Rivera says the
combination
of community and routine are
keeping him focused
and on the right path.
He's now in a culinary arts
program and is
excited about the networking
opportunities
Back on My Feet provides.
You sound like you are
definitely on the right
track.
Do you feel like you are on the
right track?
VICTOR RIVERA: For the most
part.
You know, some days are better
than others,
but, for the most part, I feel
like -- I feel
real confident about myself.
CRISTINA QUINN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Cristina Quinn in Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Remember that,
Back on My Feet.
Later tonight on PBS,
"Independent Lens" presents
a film about the challenges of
storing nuclear
material.
"Containment" looks at efforts
by governments
around the world to deal with
highly toxic
substances that will still be
dangerous tens
of thousands of years from now.
ROGER NELSON, Scientist: Behind
me is basically
the legacy of the Cold War
between the Soviet
ROGER NELSON, Scientist: Behind
me is basically
the legacy of the Cold War
between the Soviet
Union and the free West.
We produced, I think, close to
30,000 weapons,
warheads.
And there's lots of plutonium
and other fissile
materials that are left over
from the production
of those weapons.
Someone has to take care of it,
in some way
needs to isolate it.
And that's what this facility is
for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Containment," it
airs tonight
on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: A poet
playfully explores the question
of what makes
the United States unique.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose": a
conversation
with President Obama's chief of
staff, Denis
McDonough.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening for special coverage of
President
Obama's farewell speech.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.